Zephyr base improvement (#23054)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/zephyr_cmake_package.rst

.. _cmake_pkg:

Zephyr CMake Package
####################

Zephyr can be exported as a CMake config package.

> A CMake config package allows a developed to integrate Zephyr into their own application by using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A CMake config package allows a developer to integrate Zephyr into their own application by using
```

Author: fixed

``find_package(Zephyr)``.

> Exporting Zephyr as a CMake package is identical to create a reference to the current Zephyr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exporting Zephyr as a CMake package is identical to creating a reference to the current Zephyr
```

Author: fixed

installation inside the CMake user package registry.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Ubuntu

      In Linux, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``~/.cmake/package/Zephyr``

   .. group-tab:: macOS

      In macOS, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``~/.cmake/package/Zephyr``

   .. group-tab:: Windows

      In Windows, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Kitware\CMake\Packages\Zephyr``

The Zephyr package allows CMake to automatically find a Zephyr base.

> At minimum, a single Zephyr installation must be exported, but it is allowed to export multiple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One or more Zephyr installations must be exported.
```

Author: So much shorter 👍 - fixed

> Exporting multiple Zephyr installations may be useful when developing applications out-of-tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Exporting multiple Zephyr installations may be useful when developing applications out-of-tree in their own workspaces, using vendor forks, etc.
```

Author: Updated, but might need a second update, depending on `out-of-tree` naming decision.

Author: done.

Zephyr CMake package export (west)
**********************************

When installing Zephyr using :ref:`west <get_the_code>` then it is recommended to export Zephyr
using ``west zephyr-export``.

Zephyr CMake package export (without west)
******************************************

Zephyr can be exported using CMake directly.
To do so, run the following command:

> ``cmake -S <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake -B <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: bash
   
   cmake -S <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake -B <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake
```

The usual style is to put separate blocks of code in a code-block.

Author: fixed

> this will export the current Zephyr to CMake user package registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will export the current Zephyr to the CMake user package registry.
```

Author: fixed

.. _zephyr_cmake_package_zephyr_base:

Zephyr Base Environment Setting
*******************************

The Zephyr CMake package search functionality allows for explicitly specifying a Zephyr base using
an environment variable.

> In order to support the use of ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` environment setting, the following ``find_package()``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, use the following ``find_package()`` syntax:
```

Author: fixed

syntax much be used:

>   .. code-block:: cmake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: cmake
```

The code-block is an element at the same indentation level as a paragraph. The code inside the code-block is what gets indented.

Author: fixed

    find_package(Zephyr HINTS $ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE})

> This syntax instructs CMake to first search for Zephyr at the location pointed to by ``$ZEPHYR_BASE``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This syntax instructs CMake to first search for Zephyr at the location pointed to by the :envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` environment variable
```

Author: fixed

> and if that is unset, then use the normal search pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then use the normal search paths.
```

Maybe?

Author: better

.. _zephyr_cmake_search_order:

Zephyr CMake Package Search Order
*********************************

> When ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` is not used for searching, then the Zephyr matching the following criteria will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` is not used for searching, the Zephyr installation matching the following criteria will
```

Author: fixed

> be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used:
```

Author: fixed

> * Zephyr in-tree: This means a sample located inside an existing tree, will automatically use the Zephyr in same tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Zephyr applications in the zephyr repository just use that repository.
```

Author: So much simpler 👍

>   As example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example::
```

Author: fixed

      <path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr
      <path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr/samples/hello_world

  in this example, ``hello_world`` will use ``<path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr`` cause the Zephyr
  and the application shares the same tree.

> * Zephyr in-working-tree: This means a sample located in a project tree, will use the Zephyr found in same work-tree.

Reviewer: Does working-tree mean "west workspace"? If so, can you use that term? If not, I don't know what this means, can you please explain? :D

Author: If using `west` then it is the west workspace, but as users are allowed to use Zephyr without west, and the fact that Zephyr package does not rely on anything from west, I would be careful to not put west in the name, as it could give wrong impression.

How about `workspace` or `zephyr-workspace`, as opposed to zephyr-repo. ?
See also other comment.

Reviewer 2: When not using west, I don't know what a working-tree is at all, then :(. Sorry, I'm even more confused now. I'm missing something.

>   As example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example::
```

      <path-to>/other-worktree/zephyr

      <path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr
      <path-to>/zephyr-worktree/applications/hello_world

  in this example, ``hello_world`` will use ``<path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr`` as they share the
  same work-tree.

* Out-of-tree: This means a sample located out-side any Zephyr tree.
  In this case, the application will use the first Zephyr from CMake user package registry.

>   As example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example::
```

Author: fixed

      <path-to>/other-worktree/zephyr  (not exported to CMake)

      <path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr (exported to CMake)

      <path-to>/applications/hello_world

  in this example, only ``<path-to>/zephyr-worktree/zephyr`` is exported to the CMake package
  registry and therefore this Zephyr will be used.

  If user wants to test the application with ``<path-to>/other-worktree/zephyr``, this can be done
  by setting ``ZEPHYR_BASE=<path-to>/other-worktree/zephyr`` in environment, before running CMake.

> Zephyr CMake Package Version (Out-of-tree)

Reviewer: I think "out of tree" might be confusing here. It might mean one of two things:

1. application outside of the main zephyr repository
2. application outside of a west workspace

Can this be clarified by using the term "freestanding Zephyr application" or something like that? It's fine if you're happy with this as is.

Author: i'm not happy, would like something better, but it was the best I could find, so far.

Author: Updated according to discussion

******************************************

When writing an out-of-tree application then it is possible to specify a Zephyr version number
``x.y.z`` that must be used in order to build the application.

As example:

  .. code-block:: cmake

     cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
     find_package(Zephyr VERSION 2.2.0)
     project(hello_world)

will require ``hello_world`` to be built with Zephyr 2.2.0 as minimum.
CMake will search all exported candidates to find a Zephyr installation which matches this version
criteria.

Thus it is possible to have multiple Zephyr installations and have CMake automatically select
between them based on the version number provided, see `CMake Package Version`_ for details.

> As example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example::
```

Author: fixed

  .. code-block:: cmake

     cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
     find_package(Zephyr VERSION 2.a)
     project(hello_world)

Note that both ``2.a`` and ``2.b`` fulfill this requirement.

CMake also supports the keyword ``EXACT``, to ensure an exact version is used, if that is required.
In this case, the application CMakeLists.txt could be written as:

  .. code-block:: cmake

     cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
     find_package(Zephyr VERSION 2.a EXACT)
     project(hello_world)

In case no Zephyr is found which satisfies the version required, as example, the application specifies

  .. code-block:: cmake

     cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
     find_package(Zephyr VERSION 2.z)
     project(hello_world)

then an error similar to below will be printed::

  Could not find a configuration file for package "Zephyr" that is compatible
  with requested version "2.z".

  The following configuration files were considered but not accepted:

    <path-to>/zephyr-2.a-worktree/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.a.0
    <path-to>/zephyr-2.b-worktree/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.b.0

> Multiple Zephyr Installations (In-work-tree)

Reviewer: I do think I'm having trouble with these terms in-tree, in-work-tree, out-of-tree. Especially since git has a worktree concept also.

Author: > I do think I'm having trouble with these terms in-tree, in-work-tree, out-of-tree. Especially since git has a work-tree concept also.

Thanks for the comment.
And I completely agree. I struggled my-self to decide on best names.
So any suggestions for good naming is welcome.

How about:
1. in-tree / in-zephyr-tree
2. in-workspace / in-west-workspace
3. Freestanding application

Regarding the name, `in-west-workspace`, i'm not fully convinced myself, cause that name implies user must use `west`, but `find_package` will actually work the same, even if `west` was not used for cloning.
So `in-workspace` might be the best choice in 2., and it's shorter.

Reviewer 2: Discussed offline:

```
1) Application inside Zephyr repository
2) Application inside Zephyr workspace
3) Freestanding application
```

Author: Did a little rearranging of the words:
```
1) Zephyr repository application
2) Zephyr workspace application
3) Zephyr freestanding application
```

   .. group-tab:: Windows

      In Windows, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Kitware\CMake\Packages\Zephyr``

The Zephyr package allows CMake to automatically find a Zephyr base.
One or more Zephyr installations must be exported.
Exporting multiple Zephyr installations may be useful when developing
applications out-of-tree in their own workspaces using vendor forks, etc..

Zephyr CMake package export (west)
**********************************

When installing Zephyr using :ref:`west <get_the_code>` then it is recommended
to export Zephyr using ``west zephyr-export``.

Zephyr CMake package export (without west)
******************************************

Zephyr can be exported using CMake directly.
To do so, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   cmake -S <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake -B <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake

This will export the current Zephyr to the CMake user package registry.

.. _zephyr_cmake_package_zephyr_base:

Zephyr application structure
****************************

An application can be placed anywhere on your disk, but to better understand how the Zephyr

> package is used, we will name three specific layouts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
package is used, we will name three specific layouts.
```

Author: fixed

.. _cmake_pkg:

Zephyr CMake Package
####################

Zephyr can be exported as a CMake config package.

A CMake config package allows a developer to integrate Zephyr into their own
application by using ``find_package(Zephyr)``.

Exporting Zephyr as a CMake package is identical to creating a reference to the
current Zephyr installation inside the CMake user package registry.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Ubuntu

      In Linux, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``~/.cmake/package/Zephyr``

   .. group-tab:: macOS

      In macOS, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``~/.cmake/package/Zephyr``

   .. group-tab:: Windows

      In Windows, the CMake user package registry is found in:

      ``HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Kitware\CMake\Packages\Zephyr``

The Zephyr package allows CMake to automatically find a Zephyr base.

> One or more Zephyr installations must be exported.

Reviewer 3: Consider adding a comment about this exported installation becoming stale if the detection mechanisms change over time and the exported tree is an old one.

Reviewer 3: Actually I think it is too premature to add this here, let's ignore this comment for now.

Author: Functionality explained directly.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: none

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace
     ├── zephyr
     ├── ...
     └── my_applications
          └── my_first_app

  in this example, ``my_first_app`` will use ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace/zephyr`` as this Zephyr
  is located in the same workspace as the Zephyr workspace application.

* Zephyr freestanding application will use the Zephyr registered in the CMake user package registry.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: none

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-1
     └── zephyr                       (Not exported to CMake)

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2
     └── zephyr                       (Exported to CMake)

     <home>/app
     ├── CMakeLists.txt
     ├── prj.conf
     └── src
         └── main.c

  in this example, only ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-2/zephyr`` is exported to the CMake package
  registry and therefore this Zephyr will be used by the Zephyr freestanding application
  ``<home>/app``.

  If user wants to test the application with ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr``, this can be
  done by setting ``ZEPHYR_BASE=<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr`` in environment, before
  running CMake.

> 

Reviewer 3: Add a comment about env `ZEPHYR_BASE` being ignored if rebuilding an existing build that used `find_package()`

Author: Good point.
Although that would be what I expect from a build system, but as current Zephyr behaves differently, it is important to highlight.

Author: Added:
```
 .. note::

     The Zephyr package selected on the first CMake invocation will be used for all subsequent
     builds. To change the Zephyr package, as example to test the application using environment
     ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` then it is neccessary to do a pristine build first 
     (See :ref:`application_rebuild`). 
```

Reviewer 4: The act of providing ZEPHYR_BASE through HINTS is described in three different ways in the document:

- "`find_package(Zephyr HINTS $ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE})`"
- "When ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` is not used for searching"
- "to test the application using environment ``ZEPHYR_BASE``"

It might not be immediately obvious that these are the same thing. Tell me if they aren't, because I'm not 100% sure :P.
To streamline it, maybe it's good to introduce a terminology in the "Zephyr Base Environment Setting" and use it throughout.

Author: Did a clean-up on this as you suggested.
Feel free to take a second look.

  with requested version "2.z".

  The following configuration files were considered but not accepted:

    <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.a/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.a.0
    <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.b/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.b.0

.. note:: It is also possible to specify a version number for both Zephyr repository applications
          and Zephyr workspace applications. This can be used to still ensure the correct Zephyr
	  version is installed in the workspace or repository, and may be useful to avoid
	  accidential builds when only part of a workspace has been updated.

Multiple Zephyr Installations (Zephyr workspace)
************************************************

Testing out a new Zephyr version, while at the same time keeping the existing Zephyr in the
workspace untouched is sometimes beneficial.

Or having both an upstream Zephyr, Vendor specific, and a custom Zephyr in same workspace.

For example:

.. code-block:: none

   <projects>/zephyr-workspace
   ├── zephyr
   ├── zephyr-vendor
   ├── zephyr-custom
   ├── ...
   └── my_applications
        └── my_first_app

> in this setup, ``find_package(Zephyr)`` will has the following order of precedence for selecting

Reviewer 5: ~~will~~

Author: fixed

.. _cmake_pkg:

Zephyr CMake Package
####################

> Zephyr can be exported as a CMake config package.

Reviewer 4: As someone who doesn't know CMake packages, I didn't understand this intro section at all :P. It got better when I read the whole document, but if you want to make the introduction more noob-friendly, you could for example:
 - Explicitly define the target audience.
 - Assume people know nothing about CMake packages and the package registry going into this.
 - Give a bit more recommendations, when you know people will run into trouble if they don't do a certain thing.

Author: Hope the extended intro section is better

The Zephyr package allows CMake to automatically find a Zephyr base.
One or more Zephyr installations must be exported.
Exporting multiple Zephyr installations may be useful when developing or testing
Zephyr freestanding applications, Zephyr workspace application with vendor forks, etc..

Zephyr CMake package export (west)
**********************************

When installing Zephyr using :ref:`west <get_the_code>` then it is recommended
to export Zephyr using ``west zephyr-export``.

Zephyr CMake package export (without west)
******************************************

Zephyr can be exported using CMake directly.
To do so, run the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   cmake -S <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake -B <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake
   cmake --build <PATH-TO-ZEPHYR>/share/zephyr-package/cmake --target pristine

This will export the current Zephyr to the CMake user package registry and remove the temporary
files generated by CMake during export.

.. _zephyr_cmake_package_zephyr_base:

Zephyr application structure
****************************

An application can be placed anywhere on your disk, but to better understand how the Zephyr

> package is used, we will name three specific layouts.

Reviewer 4: I'm wondering if there's a difference between a "repository application" and a "workspace application" for the purpose of this document. Can they be merged?

Author: There is a difference, especially as the workspace may have multiple Zephyr's to choose from.

Zephyr repository application
=============================

A Zephyr repository has the following structure:

.. code-block:: none

   <projects>/zephyr-workspace
   └── zephyr
        ├── arch
        ├── boards
        ├── cmake
        ├── samples
        │    ├── hello_world
        │    └── ...
        ├── tests
        └── ...

> Any application located inside this tree, is simply referred to as an Zephyr repository application.

Reviewer 4: "an Zephyr" -> "a Zephyr"

Author: fixed

     ├── ...
     └── my_applications
          └── my_first_app

  in this example, ``my_first_app`` will use ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace/zephyr`` as this Zephyr
  is located in the same workspace as the Zephyr workspace application.

* Zephyr freestanding application will use the Zephyr registered in the CMake user package registry.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: none

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-1
     └── zephyr                       (Not exported to CMake)

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2
     └── zephyr                       (Exported to CMake)

     <home>/app
     ├── CMakeLists.txt
     ├── prj.conf
     └── src
         └── main.c

  in this example, only ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-2/zephyr`` is exported to the CMake package
  registry and therefore this Zephyr will be used by the Zephyr freestanding application
  ``<home>/app``.

  If user wants to test the application with ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr``, this can be
  done by setting ``ZEPHYR_BASE=<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr`` in environment, before
  running CMake.

  .. note::

     The Zephyr package selected on the first CMake invocation will be used for all subsequent

>      builds. To change the Zephyr package, as example to test the application using environment

Reviewer 4: "as example" -> "for example"

Author: fixed

     ``ZEPHYR_BASE`` then it is neccessary to do a pristine build first
     (See :ref:`application_rebuild`).

Zephyr CMake Package Version (Zephyr Freestanding Application)
**************************************************************

> When writing an out-of-tree application then it is possible to specify a Zephyr version number

Reviewer 4: Not for repository or workspace applications?

Author: It can be used for repository and workspace applications also, if you read the note below:
```
. note:: It is also possible to specify a version number for both Zephyr repository applications
          and Zephyr workspace applications. This can be used to still ensure the correct Zephyr
	  version is installed in the workspace or repository, and may be useful to avoid
	  accidental builds when only part of a workspace has been updated.
```

but especially for a repository app, one may assume that the Zephyr version of the repository app, ought to be correct.
That's why this is described primarily as a Freestanding app benefit.

Reviewer 4: Yep. I was confused by "is possible". Maybe change "it is possible" to "it can be beneficial" or something.

Reviewer 4: Also: "out-of-tree" -> "freestanding"?

Author: > Yep. I was confused by "is possible". Maybe change "it is possible" to "it can be beneficial" or something.

Good point. Confuse one, and you might confuse more.
Will change a little.

> Also: "out-of-tree" -> "freestanding"?

Correct, seems I missed this one, when we decided on new terminology.
Nicely spotted.

Author: Rephrased a little in this section, and removed `Freestanding` from title, to make it clearer it can be used for all app, but most beneficial for freestanding apps.

   cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
   find_package(Zephyr 2.a)
   project(app)

Note that both ``2.a`` and ``2.b`` fulfill this requirement.

CMake also supports the keyword ``EXACT``, to ensure an exact version is used, if that is required.
In this case, the application CMakeLists.txt could be written as:

.. code-block:: cmake

   cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
   find_package(Zephyr 2.a EXACT)
   project(app)

In case no Zephyr is found which satisfies the version required, as example, the application specifies

.. code-block:: cmake

   cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13.1)
   find_package(Zephyr 2.z)
   project(app)

then an error similar to below will be printed::

  Could not find a configuration file for package "Zephyr" that is compatible
  with requested version "2.z".

  The following configuration files were considered but not accepted:

    <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.a/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.a.0
    <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.b/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.b.0

.. note:: It is also possible to specify a version number for both Zephyr repository applications

>           and Zephyr workspace applications. This can be used to still ensure the correct Zephyr

Reviewer 4: Does this mean it won't search exported Zephyrs if the version doesn't match?

Author: It will be searched, but not used, and thus give an error such as:
```
Could not find a configuration file for package "Zephyr" that is compatible
with requested version "2.z".

The following configuration files were considered but not accepted:

  <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.a/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.a.0
```
if user specifies that `2.z` is required but the Zephyr version is only `2.a`.

This could happen for someone who is working on a not-commited app (dirty-repo), and then check-outs and older Zephyr for other reasons.
Switching back to working on the not-commited app without checking out the new Zephyr version.

Reviewer 4: What if there's an exported 2.z. Will the app use that instead?

Author: In a freestanding app, yes.

If you are working in a Zephyr repository app (let's say Zephyr 2.a) and specifies 2z, and there is a Zephyr 2.z else-where in the system, then no.
Cause this would mean you would be using a Zephyr OUTSIDE your current Zephyr repo.
This would most likely be a user-error, and if we decided to use the 2.z else-where, I believe we might confuse users.

If a user in this case really wants to use the 2.z version, then he can specify `ZEPHYR_BASE=/<path>/<to>/zephyr (2.z)`, cause `ZEPHYR_BASE` can override everything.

.. _cmake_pkg:

Zephyr CMake Package
####################

> The Zephyr `CMake package`_ is a convenient way to create a Zephyr-based application.

Author: Isn't that what i'm doing in the following sentence, if you read it all:

```
The Zephyr CMake package is a convenient way to create a Zephyr-based application.

The Zephyr CMake package ensures that CMake can automatically select a Zephyr 
to use for building the application, whether it is a Zephyr repository application, 
Zephyr workspace application, or a Zephyr freestanding application.
```

> The Zephyr `CMake package`_ is a convenient way to create a Zephyr-based application.

Reviewer 4: I was thinking about this, and to me, the second sentence doesn't narrow the scope of the document, because it doesn't say whether that is the only thing the Zephyr CMake package does, or if it's just one of many.

The Zephyr CMake package ensures that CMake can automatically select a Zephyr to use for building
the application, whether it is a Zephyr repository application, Zephyr workspace application, or a
Zephyr freestanding application.

When developing a Zephyr-based application, then a developer simply needs to write
``find_package(Zephyr)`` in the beginning of the application :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file.

To use the Zephyr CMake package it must first be exported to the `CMake user package registry`_.
This is means creating a reference to the current Zephyr installation inside the
CMake user package registry.

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Ubuntu

>       In Linux, the CMake user package registry is found in:

Author: I think it is important enough for people to be aware that we are not copying files into other places on his disk, but simply creating a reference back to Zephyr.

As well as informing people where this reference is stored.

In this example ``my_first_app`` is a Zephyr workspace application.

.. note:: The root of a Zephyr workspace is identical to ``west topdir`` if the workspace was
          installed using ``west``

Zephyr freestanding application
===============================

A Zephyr freestanding application is a Zephyr application located outside of a Zephyr workspace.

.. code-block:: none

   <projects>/zephyr-workspace
   ├── zephyr
   ├── bootloader
   └── ...

   <home>/app
   ├── CMakeLists.txt
   ├── prj.conf
   └── src
       └── main.c

In this example ``app`` is a Zephyr freestanding application.

Zephyr Base Environment Setting
*******************************

The Zephyr CMake package search functionality allows for explicitly specifying
a Zephyr base using an environment variable.

To do this, use the following ``find_package()`` syntax:

.. code-block:: cmake

   find_package(Zephyr HINTS $ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE})

This syntax instructs CMake to first search for Zephyr using the Zephyr base environment setting
:envvar:`ZEPHYR_BASE` and then use the normal search paths.

.. _zephyr_cmake_search_order:

Zephyr CMake Package Search Order
*********************************

> When Zephyr base environment setting is not used for searching, the Zephyr installation matching

Author: Your comment made me think that I actually want to tell people about the search order in this section.

Overriding the search order should therefore be a note.

Suggestion:
```
When using CMake function `find_package(Zephyr HINTS $ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE})`
 the following criteria will be used to find the correct Zephyr installation:

.. note:: The Zephyr Base Environment Setting can be used to explicitly specify
 the Zephyr installation to use, and thus override the search order.   
```

Thoughts ?

> When Zephyr base environment setting is not used for searching, the Zephyr installation matching

Reviewer 4: Good idea!

* Zephyr workspace application will use the Zephyr that share the same workspace.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: none

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace
     ├── zephyr
     ├── ...
     └── my_applications
          └── my_first_app

  in this example, ``my_first_app`` will use ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace/zephyr`` as this Zephyr
  is located in the same workspace as the Zephyr workspace application.

* Zephyr freestanding application will use the Zephyr registered in the CMake user package registry.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: none

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-1
     └── zephyr                       (Not exported to CMake)

     <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2
     └── zephyr                       (Exported to CMake)

     <home>/app
     ├── CMakeLists.txt
     ├── prj.conf
     └── src
         └── main.c

  in this example, only ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-2/zephyr`` is exported to the CMake package
  registry and therefore this Zephyr will be used by the Zephyr freestanding application
  ``<home>/app``.

  If user wants to test the application with ``<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr``, this can be

>   done by using the Zephyr Base environment setting, meaning set

Author: I'm a little in doubt.

Until now, I have not noticed internal page reference in the Zephyr documentation.
When I see a link in Zephyr doc, it is usually to another page.
(Although I can't say such internal page references doesn't exists).

Personally, I also think it is nice as a reader if I know that a link always points to a page outside the current document.

>   done by using the Zephyr Base environment setting, meaning set

Reviewer 4: The main point is that people know that this concept was introduced earlier, so a "see above" would serve the same purpose for me.

>   done by using the Zephyr Base environment setting, meaning set

Author: See above, it will be.

  ``ZEPHYR_BASE=<projects>/zephyr-workspace-1/zephyr``, before
  running CMake.

  .. note::

     The Zephyr package selected on the first CMake invocation will be used for all subsequent
     builds. To change the Zephyr package, for example to test the application using Zephyr base
     environment setting, then it is necessary to do a pristine build first
     (See :ref:`application_rebuild`).

Zephyr CMake Package Version
****************************

When writing an application then it is possible to specify a Zephyr version number ``x.y.z`` that

> must be used in order to build the application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
is required in order to build the application.
```

Specifying a version is especially useful for a Zephyr freestanding application as it ensures the

> application is built with a minimal Zephyr version.

Reviewer 4: The sentence doesn't really give new information, IMO it should be merged with the next sentence.
```suggestion
Specifying a version for a Zephyr freestanding application ensures CMake picks a compatible Zephyr installation
when there are multiple installations in the system.
```

Author: Good suggestion.

    <projects>/zephyr-workspace-2.b/zephyr/share/zephyr-package/cmake/ZephyrConfig.cmake, version: 2.b.0

.. note:: It can also be beneficial to specify a version number for Zephyr repository applications
          and Zephyr workspace applications. Specifying a version in those cases ensures the
	  application will only build if the Zephyr repository or workspace is matching.
	  This can be useful to avoid accidental builds when only part of a workspace has been
	  updated.

Multiple Zephyr Installations (Zephyr workspace)
************************************************

Testing out a new Zephyr version, while at the same time keeping the existing Zephyr in the
workspace untouched is sometimes beneficial.

Or having both an upstream Zephyr, Vendor specific, and a custom Zephyr in same workspace.

For example:

.. code-block:: none

   <projects>/zephyr-workspace
   ├── zephyr
   ├── zephyr-vendor
   ├── zephyr-custom
   ├── ...
   └── my_applications
        └── my_first_app

in this setup, ``find_package(Zephyr)`` has the following order of precedence for selecting
which Zephyr to use:

* Project name: ``zephyr``

> * First project, when Zephyr projects are ordered lexicographical, in this case.

Reviewer 4: This sentence seems incomplete. What does "First project" mean here?

Author: That means the first project in the list of all other Zephyr projects.
And that list is ordered lexicographical.

Feel free to suggest a better short sentence.

>   * ``zephyr-custom``

Reviewer 4: Should this list also contain "zephyr"?

Author: As the `zephyr` itself has the highest preference per default, then there is little point is adding `zephyr` itself to the list.

I prefer to keep it simple, by telling users how the can make other `zephyr`-folders higher preference.
